+++
draft = false
date = 2019-04-01T18:01:02+05:30
title = "FB Interview Experience Part 2: Phone Interview"
slug = "fb-interview-2"
tags = []
categories = [ "interview" ]
series = ["fb-interview"]
+++

As I mentioned in the [previous part](/posts/fb-interview-1), my phone
interview was scheduled on 28th August 7:00 - 7:45 PM IST. The interview
was over [BlueJeans](//bluejeans.com) and the collaborative coding environment
was [coderpad.io](//coderpad.io). I already knew the name of my
interviewer beforehand and did take a look at his LinkedIn profile and
areas of interest.

# The interview

So, instance #2 of being lucky - my interviewer was someone who regularly
used OCaml and was in general a FP person (I knew this from his LinkedIn).
Now, I am pretty well-versed in FP (not an expert or anything but I can write
code which works), haskell and scala. I had also done a course on Functional
Programming in the previous semester and so was in touch with puzzle questions
which are typically solved using functional languages - list/tree traversals.
I was also familiar with notations. I'm mentioning all the above because the
knowledge actually helped in the interview.

**NOTE: Due to NDA, I can't reveal the questions which were asked**

So the question which was given to me was more attuned to functional languages as its very
easy to pattern match and stuff while writing algorithms in them. I believe someone
not familiar with this would have been slightly confused by the form of
the question and the data structure I was using.  
**P.S.** I had actually solved this exact question in one of the pattern matching
assignments of the course mentioned before.

Looking back, I could have actually written a pretty elegant solution to it in
haskell using pattern matching without too much effort (2 lines).

But somehow, I had gone into the interview thinking that I'll code my solution in
C++ (which is sort of the standard for algorithmic questions) and I hadn't written
haskell in like 3-4 months. I ended up writing a longer solution in C++. Alongwith
the null pointer error handling, I guess I wrote around 40 lines of code, which did
take some time.

Once my implementation was done, we discussed edge cases, cases when the function could
fail and even solutions to it. And that was it. My interview lasted about 35-40 minutes.

# Post Interview

I thought that usually 45 minute interviews have atleast 2 questions, so somehow I had
performed badly - using up all the time on only one question, but my interviewer had mentioned
somewhere in between that this was the only question he had brought so I wasn't too scared.

At the same time slot and date when I had my interview, another one of my friends also had his
phone interview. We both had been referred by Sayash and had the exact same date and time slots.
His interviewer asked him more standard algorithmic questions (but I remember that it would
have been difficult for me to solven one of them). So, lucky again!!

My interviewer had mentioned that they would get back to me within 2 weeks, so I was ready for the
wait. To my surprise and happiness, I received a mail at 9:00 a.m. the very next day
(29th August) informing me that they'll be moving forward with the next stage of the interview
which were the onsite rounds in the London Office.

Details of the onsite rounds in the [next part](/posts/fb-interview-3).
